Oscar Wong via Getty Images

When decorating a new space, it’s important to know which pieces are worth the investment, and which are worth finding for cheap. But let’s be honest ― we’ll take a good deal any day.

Thankfully, you don’t have to expend tons of time or energy searching for the best sites for affordable mid-century modern furniture and minimalist home decor on a budget. Sure, few experiences will replace the glorious feeling of finding that hidden flea market treasure, or that perfect floor sample that seemed like it was waiting for you all along. But that’s no reason to ignore the wealth of opportunities that exist on the interwebs.

Below, check out our list of the best websites for discount furniture and home goods. And, FYI, HuffPost may receive a share from purchases made via links on this page.

Take a look:

1. Wayfair.com: Our favorite part about this site is that there’s free shipping on items over $49! And the site runs daily sales where you can find great buys for up to 70 percent off.

2. Target: Home decor and furniture designers specifically partner with the retailer to bring lower-priced versions of their lines to the masses. Don’t miss Target’s newest furniture line, Project 62, which brings mid-century modern styles to you at lower price points. Check here for Target coupons.

3. AllModern: Lovers of all things Don Draper will adore this site for its mid-century modern finds that are WAY cheaper than other sites.

4. Joss & Main: This flash sale site that’s truly worth the rabbit hole.

5. World Market: The site has just as many items for decorating your indoor space as it does your outdoor space.

6. H&M Home: You could spend hundreds of dollars on curtain. Or you could spend $25.

7. Urban Outfitters: This retailer carries boho and vintage furniture that’s just as relaxed and cozy as its clothing options. Snag free shipping on orders over $49. Orders under $49 have a flat rate shipping fee of $5. Check here for Urban Outfitters promo codes.

8. Ikea: Obviously. But be mindful of the shipping costs.

9. Etsy.com: In addition to the great furniture finds, Etsy is also great for personalized items like monogrammed towels or embroidered linen bags. Furniture and decor shops we like are Gallavanting Girls and Two Be Continued.

10. Houzz: This site is devoted to remodeling your home, and features a shop where you can find discounts on tons of products from tiles to bathtubs to sofas to throw pillows.

11. Hayneedle is part of the Walmart family, but don’t let that fool you. It has a huge selection of really affordable home decor and accents, so it’s worth browsing to see if there’s something on your list.

12. Crate & Barrel: Find statement pieces that’ll last at this well-known retailer.

13. LexMod features furniture that’s focused on modern design as well as affordability.

14. Apt2B makes outfitting your apartment as easy as possible with more style, less money, and seamless delivery.

15. One Kings Lane: The flash sale website looks like the Pinterest boards of our dreams, combined with discount furniture, decor, vintage finds and even towels and clothes. Get there.

16. HAUTELOOK: Another flash sale site, another throw blanket for 20 percent off.

17. Nordstrom Rack: Go for the discount designer shoes, stay for the discount candles.

18. Pier 1: The perfect place to stop for inexpensive items like pillows, glassware, plates and more. Check here for Pier 1 coupon codes.

19. T.J. Maxx: Purchase designer linens for less, or stock up on mix-and-match decorative plates for a fraction of the price.

21. Jet: Just like Amazon, Jet carries an astounding collection of furniture for all different tastes and price points. Plus, you can stock up on household essentials like cleaning supplies, personal care, pantry staples and even new running shoes while you’re at it. Our favorite part about this site? You score free shipping when you spend more than $35, which, let’s face it, isn’t hard to do.

22. Overstock.com: In addition to everything being on sale all the time, the site runs daily and weekly flash sales.

23. Minted.com: The adorable home decor site is the perfect place to find little touches like cloth napkins, wall art or a new lampshade.

24. Home Depot: Last but certainly not least. The site offers free shipping on orders over $45, and has basically everything you could want for your home, including if you just want to start building from scratch.